# Advancing Node.js with ECMAScript 2015, 2016, 2017, and beyond

In 2015, the ECMAScript committee released a long-awaited major update of the JavaScript language. The update brought in many new features to JavaScript, such as Promises, arrow functions, and class objects. The language update sets the stage for improvement since it should dramatically improve our ability to write clean, understandable JavaScript code.

The browser makers are adding those much-needed features, meaning the V8 engine is adding those features as well. These features are making their way to Node.js, starting with version 4.x.

```
To learn about the current status of ES2015/2016/2017/and so on in Node.js, visit https://nodejs.org/en/docs/es6/.
```

By default, only the ES2015, 2016, and 2017 features that V8 considers stable are enabled by Node.js. Further features can be enabled with command-line options. The almost-complete features are enabled with the --es_staging option. The website documentation gives more information.

```
The Node green website (http://node.green/) has a table that lists the status of a long list of features in Node.js versions.

The ES2019 language spec is published at https://www.ecma-international.org/publications/standards/Ecma-262.htm.

The TC-39 committee does its work on GitHub at https://github.com/tc39.
```

The ES2015 (and later) features make a big improvement to the JavaScript language. One feature, the Promise class, should mean a fundamental rethinking of common idioms in Node.js programming. In ES2017, a pair of new keywords, async and await, simplifies writing asynchronous code in Node.js, which should encourage the Node.js community to further rethink the common idioms of the platform.

There's a long list of new JavaScript features but let's quickly go over the two of them that we'll use extensively.

The first is a lighter-weight function syntax called the arrow function:

```javascript
fs.readFile('file.txt', 'utf8', (err, data) => { 
  if (err) ...; // do something with the error 
  else ...;  // do something with the data 
}); 
```

This is more than the syntactic sugar of replacing the function keyword with the fat arrow. Arrow functions are lighter weight as well as being easier to read. The lighter weight comes at the cost of changing the value of this inside the arrow function. In regular functions, this has a unique value inside the function. In an arrow function, this has the same value as the scope containing the arrow function. This means that, when using an arrow function, we don't have to jump through hoops to bring this into the callback function because this is the same at both levels of the code.

The next feature is the Promise class, which is used for deferred and asynchronous computations. Deferred code execution to implement asynchronous behavior is a key paradigm for Node.js and it requires two idiomatic conventions:

* The last argument to an asynchronous function is a callback function, which is called when an asynchronous execution is to be performed.
* The first argument to the callback function is an error indicator.

While convenient, these conventions have resulted in multilayer code pyramids that can be difficult to understand and maintain:

```javascript
doThis(arg1, arg2, (err, result1, result2) => { 
    if (err) ...; 
    else { 
         // do some work 
         doThat(arg2, arg3, (err2, results) => { 
              if (err2) ...; 
              else { 
                     doSomethingElse(arg5, err => { 
                             if (err) .. ; 
                             else ..; 
                     }); 
              } 
         }); 
    } 
}); 
```

You don't need to understand the code; it's just an outline of what happens in practice as we use callbacks. Depending on how many steps are required for a specific task, a code pyramid can get quite deep. Promises will let us unravel the code pyramid and improve reliability because error handling is more straightforward and easily captures all errors.

A Promise class is created as follows:

```javascript
function doThis(arg1, arg2) { 
    return new Promise((resolve, reject) => { 
        // execute some asynchronous code 
        if (errorIsDetected) return reject(errorObject); 
        // When the process is finished call this: 
        resolve(result1, result2); 
    }); 
}
```

Rather than passing in a callback function, the caller receives a Promise object. When properly utilized, the preceding pyramid can be coded as follows:

```
doThis(arg1, arg2) 
.then(result => { 
  // This can receive only one value, hence to
  // receive multiple values requires an object or array
  return doThat(arg2, arg3); 
}) 
.then((results) => { 
  return doSomethingElse(arg5); 
}) 
.then(() => { 
   // do a final something 
}) 
.catch(err => { 
   // errors land here 
});
```

This works because the Promise class supports chaining if a then function returns a Promise object.

The async/await feature implements the promise of the Promise class to simplify asynchronous coding. This feature becomes active within an async function:

```javascript
async function mumble() {
   // async magic happens here
}
```

An async arrow function is as follows: 

```javascript
const mumble = async () => {
    // async magic happens here
};
```

To see how much of an improvement the async function paradigm gives us, let's recode the earlier example as follows:

```javascript
async function doSomething(arg1, arg2, arg3, arg4, arg5) {
    const { result1, result2 } = await doThis(arg1, arg2);
    const results = await doThat(arg2, arg3);
    await doSomethingElse(arg5);
    // do a final something
    return finalResult;
}
```

Again, we don't need to understand the code but just look at its shape. Isn't this a breath of fresh air compared to the nested structure we started with?

The await keyword is used with a Promise. It automatically waits for the Promise to resolve. If the Promise resolves successfully, then the value is returned and if it resolves with an error, then that error is thrown. Both handling results and throwing errors are handled in the usual manner.

This example also shows another ES2015 feature: destructuring. The fields of an object can be extracted using the following code:

```javascript
const { value1, value2 } = {
    value1: "Value 1", value2: "Value 2", value3: "Value3"
};
```

This demonstrates having an object with three fields but only extracting two of the fields.

To continue our exploration of advances in JavaScript, let's take a look at Babel.